---
slug: MO_rotation
title: How to rotate MO coefficients
authors: [prs]
tags: [qm,molecular orbitals,linear algebra]
---

If you're a masochist like me, and you're writing or have written a quantum chemistry
program, you'll want to rotate molecular orbital (MO) coefficients
to save yourself recalculating wavefunctions at different positions/orientations.
Now that I've sufficiently reduced the interested audience for this to the point we
could fit in the seats of a social-distanced sedan, let me take you on a painful 
but *hopefully* helpful journey.

Throughout this I'm going to assume that all rotations are about some common origin, $\mathbf{O}$,
but of course you're welcome to double the pain and mix in rotations about arbitrary points in space if you wish to be more general. I'm also going to put aside the various different
ordering conventions, which will probably make you pull your hair out if you try to
interoperate between many different programs.

But first we need a quick refresher on the difference between Cartesian and spherical/pure 
Gaussian basis sets like those used in quantum chemistry.
Note that throughout this I'm going to ignore elaboration of the different normalizations
within contracted Gaussians, because frankly that just makes the equations more verbose...

## Contracted Gaussian basis sets
Contracted Gaussian functions are of the form

$$
\chi(\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{r_k}) = \sum_k^K c_k N f(\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{r_k}) e^{-\alpha_k |\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{r_k}|^2}
$$

where $K$ is the degree of contraction (i.e. number of primitive Gaussian functions),
$N$ is the normalization constant we're going to ignore for now, $\alpha_k$ is the
exponent for each primitive basis function and $c_k$ the contraction coefficient.

Typically these sorts of basis sets will be in some library read in by the QM program of choice,
e.g. this is an excerpt from the STO-3G basis set in `.gbs` format, with the left column being
the $\alpha_k$, and the right column being $c_k$

```
H     0 
S   3   1.00
      3.42525091             0.15432897       
      0.62391373             0.53532814       
      0.16885540             0.44463454   
```

With the exception of the $f(\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{r_k})$ term, $\chi$ is purely radial.
However, there are two common choices of $f$: Cartesian and spherical.

## Cartesian polynomials

In a Cartesian Gaussian basis set, $f$ takes the following form based on angular momentum $l$:

$$
\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{r_k} = \{x,y,z\}\\
f(x,y,z) = x^i y^j z^k
$$

where $i + j + k = l$ and all of $i,j,k$ are whole numbers.

Because multiplication is commutative i.e. $x^2 y = y x^2$, for each angular momenta, $l$, there are a number of 'unique' 
functions e.g.


| Label   | Angular momentum  | #  | Components           |
| ------- | ----------------- | -- | --------          |
| $p$     | $l = 1$           | **3**  | $x$, $y$. $z$           |
| $d$     | $l = 2$           | **6**  | $xx$, $xy$, $xz$, $yz$, $zz$  |
| $f$     | $l = 3$           | **10** | $xxx$, $xxy$, $xxz$, $xyy$, $xyz$, $xzz$, $yyy$, $yyz$, $yzz$, $zzz$ |

and so on...


## Spherical/Pure polynomials

In a pure (or spherical) Gaussian basis set, $f$ usually corresponds to the *real* regular
solid harmonics, which are directly related to the usual spherical harmonics $Y_l^m$
These are a bit more of a rabbit hole..

**Spherical harmonics ($Y_l^m$)**

A much better overview of the spherical harmonics and their derivation can be found on
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_harmonics) or in any number of other
places.

Nevertheless, they take the form:

$$
Y_l^m(\theta,\phi) = N e^{im\phi} P_l^m \cos \theta
$$

where $N$ is yet another different normalization factor, $\theta$ and $\phi$ are the polar 
angle/colatitude $[0, \pi]$ and the azimuthal angle/longitude $[0, 2 \pi]$ respectively, 
and $P_l^m$ is an  [associated Legendre Polynomial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associated_Legendre_polynomials)


**Regular solid harmonics ($R_l^m$)**

Given the previous definition of the spherical harmonics, the regular solid harmonics
take the form:

$$
R_l^m(r, \theta, \phi) = \sqrt{\frac{4 \pi}{2 l + 1}} r^l Y_l^m(\theta, \phi)
$$

or, simplified:
$$
R_l^m(r, \theta, \phi) = \sqrt{\frac{(l - m)!}{(l + m)!}} P_l^m(\cos \theta) e^{im\phi}
$$

***Real* regular solid harmonics ($R_{l,m}$)**

Finally, the functions $f$ that are actually used are of the form:

$$
f(r, \theta, \phi) = C_{l,m}(r, \theta, \phi)\ \mathrm{or}\ S_{l,m}(r,\theta,\phi)
$$

where

$$
R_{l,0} = C_{l,0} = R_l^0\\
R_{l,m} = C_{l,m} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}((-1)^m R_l^m + R_l^{-m})\ \mathrm{where}\ m = 1 \ldots l \\
R_{l,m} = S_{l,m} = \frac{1}{i \sqrt{2}}((-1)^m R_l^m + R_l^{-m})\ \mathrm{where}\ m = -1 \ldots -l \\
$$

This means that there are $2 l + 1$ components for a pure Gaussian basis with angular 
momentum $l$  e.g.: 

| Label   | Angular momentum  | #  | Components           |
| ------- | ----------------- | -- |---------          |
| $p$     | $l = 1$           | **3**  | $C_{10} = z$, $C_{11} = x$, $S_{11} = y$           |
| $d$     | $l = 2$           | **5**  | $C_{20}$, $C_{21}$, $S_{21}$, $C_{22}$, $S_{22}$  |
| $f$     | $l = 3$           | **7** | $C_{30}$, $C_{31}$, $S_{31}$, $C_{32}$, $S_{32}$, $C_{33}$, $S_{33}$ |

This should give a good idea why they find use in QM programs (fewer basis functions = fewer integrals to compute).


## Rotating Cartesian Gaussians

One way to imagine the molecular orbital coefficients associated
with a Cartesian Gaussian is as an $l$ rank tensor e.g. a $3 \times 3$
matrix for a $d$ function, a $3 \times 3 \times 3$ cube for an $f$ etc.

This obviously is very wasteful, as only the upper triangle (or pyramid)
is permutationally unique. As such, they're typically stored as vectors
(or columns of a matrix) of length 

$$
\frac{(l + 1)(l + 2)}{2}
$$

This usually renders rotation of these coefficients in real space to be
done by hand coded routines rather than a simple matrix multiply.

However, we can convert the rotation matrix into an appropriate matrix
to perform the conversion via the following algorithm implemented in C++:

```cpp title="cg_rotation_matrix.cpp"
/*
 * Result should be R: an MxM rotation matrix for 
 * P: a MxN set of coordinates
 * giving results P' = R P
 *
 * Assume that the poorly named power_index_arrays gives
 * arrays of length l that look like the following:
 * xy = {0, 1}
 * xyz = {0, 1, 2}
 * xxy = {0, 0, 1}
 * xyx = {0, 1, 0}
 */
template <int l>
Mat cartesian_gaussian_rotation_matrix(const Mat3x3 rotation) {
    constexpr int num_moments = (l + 1) * (l + 2) / 2;
    Mat result = Mat::Zero(num_moments, num_moments);
    auto cg_powers = power_index_arrays<l>();
    int p1_idx = 0;
    for (const auto &p1: cg_powers) {
	    int p2_idx = 0;
	    // copy as we're permuting p2
        for (auto p2: cg_powers) {
            do {
                double tmp{1.0};
                for (int k = 0; k < l; k++) {
                    tmp *= rotation(p2[k], p1[k]);
                }
                result(p2_idx, p1_idx) += tmp;
            } while (std::next_permutation(p2.begin(), p2.end()));
	        p2_idx++;
        }
	    p1_idx++;
    }
    return result;
}
```

In essence this is just accounting for all the redundant terms we'd
get that arise from the permutations of tensor indices. Going through
the code line-by-line


So our rotated column vector (or block of a matrix) of molecular orbital
coefficients will simply be

$$
\mathbf{P}' = \mathbf{R} \mathbf{P} 
$$

## Rotating pure Gaussians

If you've made it this far, well now we're in for the more painful bit.

Obviously we can't directly use the above rotation matrix for a set of
pure Gaussian molecular orbital coefficients, but we can convert the
coefficients to their equivalent Cartesian representation, perform the
rotation, then convert back.

Frankly, I find this alternative preferable to dealing with [Wigner D matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wigner_D-matrix),
 [Clebsch-Gordan coefficients](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clebsch%E2%80%93Gordan_coefficients) or any of the other painful aspects of
rotating spherical harmonics... 


**Spherical to Cartesian transformations**

Thankfully, I'm far from the first person to have wanted to perform this conversion,
so there are tabulated transforms (along with implementations to generate them) available
e.g., in [HORTON](https://theochem.github.io/horton/2.0.2/tech_ref_gaussian_basis.html#transformation-from-cartesian-to-pure-basis-functions). Much of this is based on
the [Schlegel & Frisch paper](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qua.560540202)
from the mid 90s.

This gives us $\mathbf{c}$, a transformation matrix which will convert from Cartesian coefficients
to pure coefficients. But what of the inverse transform? $\mathbf{c}$ is not an invertible matrix (obviously, as it's not square). Thankfully this is mentioned in the Schlegel & Frisch
paper, and we can find the inverse transformation via:

$$
\mathbf{c} \mathbf{S} \mathbf{c}^\intercal = \mathbf{I}
$$

$$
\mathbf{c}^{-1} = \mathbf{S} \mathbf{c}^\intercal
$$

Here $\mathbf{S}$ is the matrix of overlap between normalized Cartesian gaussians
of the same total angular momentum, where (if $i,j,k$ are powers of $x,y,z$ respectively)
$\mathbf{S}$ can be derived from the following horrible expression:

$$
S(i_1, j_1, k_1, i_2, j_2, k_2) = \frac{(i_1 + i_2)! (j_1 + j_2)! (k_1 + k_2)!}{((i_1 + i_2)/2)! ((j_1 + j_2)/2)! ((k_1 + k_2)/2)!}
 \times \sqrt{\frac{i_1 ! j_1 ! k_1 ! i_2 ! j_2 ! k_2 !}{(2 i_1)! (2 j_1)! (2 k_1)! (2 i_2)! (2 j_2)! (2 k_2)!}}
$$

where all of $i_1 + i_2$, $j_1 + j_2$ and $k_1 + k_2$ are even, $0$ otherwise.

The neat part after all of this, is that we can simply transform $\mathbf{R}$, the
Cartesian Gaussian rotation matrix into $\mathbf{R}'$, the pure/spherical
Gaussian rotation matrix as follows:

$$
\mathbf{R}' = \mathbf{c} \mathbf{R} \mathbf{c}^{-1}
$$

and perform the rotation directly on the spherical molecular orbital coefficients:

$$
\mathbf{P}' = \mathbf{c} \mathbf{R} \mathbf{c}^{-1} \mathbf{P}
$$

Whew... Hopefully I don't have any errors in the equations, but if I do feel free
to name and shame me for being so sloppy.